md/MultiMember.md, before:

# Multi Member

Multi Member Elections can be a good way of obtaining proportionality or at least minority representation. Instead of electing one representative for a seat, several are chosen.

## Vote for One

Voters each pick one choice and the top choices are chosen to fill the seats. Depending on the number of seats and the distribution of factions this can be very inefficient and force voters to attempt to coordinate their votes. If there are three seats and one faction has more than 2/3 of the support, the large faction needs to offer two choices and make sure their votes are split evenly between the two.

## Approval, Cumulative Approval and X of Y

Approval is a better method and is used in a lot of places. Voters mark as many choices as they please, and the seats are filled by the top vote getters. Approval has problems with Bullet Voting and with factions being able to coordinate their vote, such that the largest coordinated faction can take all of the seats. Cumulative Approval gives the voter a fixed number of votes that they can distribute among choices.

X of Y is an improvement of Approval that restricts the number of choices parties can offer and the number of choices a voter can select. Vote for up to X choices, but Y choices will be elected. This method can be used to guarantee minority seats in a body, but will not efficiently allocate those seats. X of Y is tabulated in the same manner as Approval.

## Single Transferable Vote (STV)

Most of the discussion on Multi Member methods focuses on this group.

### Generalized Description of STV

STV uses a Ranked Ballot.

A quota based on the number of valid ballots is set, usually __1 + ( Ballots ÷ ( Number of Choices + 1 ) )__.

The highest choice (plurality) that exceeds the quota is elected. The amount by which the choice exceeded the quota is the Surplus, this is redistributed to the next highest choice on the ballot. This is where the methods diverge, some older methods randomly picks ballots to redistribute, but all current methods split the ballots.

If no choice reaches the quota, the lowest choice is eliminated and their ballots are redistributed.

The Vote::Count STV template also elects all remaining choices in the event that eliminating a choice would make it impossible to fill all of the seats.

## Vote Charging

Vote Charging is mathematically equivalent to Surplus Transfer, but is simpler to explain. Each Vote is treated like a roll of pennies. When a choice reaches the STV quota, the votes are charged. In future iterations the ballots are weighted by their remaining value.



## Scoring

With Approval, Ranked or Range Ballots each possible outcome of the election can be used to generate scores based on the voter preferences, the outcome generating the highest score is chosen.

Scoring encounters the same weighting issues as Borda Count does.

## Multi Member Methods Implementation and Status

| Method | Implementation |
|:------------- |:-----|
| Vote For One | [Vote::Count::TopCount](https://metacpan.org/pod/Vote::Count::TopCount) |
| Approval | [Vote::Count::Approval](https://metacpan.org/pod/Vote::Count::Approval) |
| X of Y | [Vote::Count::Approval](https://metacpan.org/pod/Vote::Count::Approval) |
| Cumulative Approval | *Unimplemented* |
| STV methods with Random | won't implement random in Vote::Count |
| STV: ERS97 | unimplemented |
| STV: Scottish | unimplemented |
| STV: Meek | unimplemented |
| Vote Charging | unimplemented |
| Scoring | unimplemented |

Commit message:

Squashed commit of the following:
Feature branch for minmax methods back to master.

commit 52ac54804df9952c07c1e9b888e11979f79a44d5
Author: John Karr <brainbuz@brainbuz.org>
Date:   Tue Aug 4 19:03:51 2020 -0400

    more coverage cleanup for release 1.07

commit 5464e578769025838c925c72523ff97e844f733b
Author: John Karr <brainbuz@brainbuz.org>
Date:   Tue Aug 4 18:25:02 2020 -0400

    while working on coverage found a bug in STAR.

commit f7003212c2f157f0f75ac63a08261647f7b5681e
Author: John Karr <brainbuz@brainbuz.org>
Date:   Tue Aug 4 17:28:54 2020 -0400

    proofreading almost ready for release.

commit aff9e4b33781e899a8057129d4aa30dba1ed9a8f
Author: John Karr <brainbuz@brainbuz.org>
Date:   Mon Aug 3 23:30:42 2020 -0400

    minmax and tests is mostly complete.

commit 8bab5c5a6e29227186f186164126017e5859ec43
Author: John Karr <brainbuz@brainbuz.org>
Date:   Mon Aug 3 16:15:27 2020 -0400

    work on minmax, work on common and active set.

commit ee350bc77cd0e7ce257058ba0f96c335af0128d2
Author: John Karr <brainbuz@brainbuz.org>
Date:   Sun Aug 2 22:45:00 2020 -0400

    added getactivelist to vote::count

commit 183edf69647d9da173f3931489bdd6d290ebfeae
Author: John Karr <brainbuz@brainbuz.org>
Date:   Sun Aug 2 16:31:34 2020 -0400

    merged circlci windows test
    started MinMax Method, scoring test for winning and margin submethods.

commit 1dfb28929f301d49a04a693430422d954776bec2
Merge: 55ecb87 20850c3
Author: John Karr <brainbuz@brainbuz.org>
Date:   Fri Jul 31 18:01:04 2020 -0400

    Merge branch 'circleci-project-setup' into minmax

commit 55ecb87e7025951ce16ec8fd383290949ccc7cd4
Author: John Karr <brainbuz@brainbuz.org>
Date:   Fri Jul 31 03:29:55 2020 -0400

    Removing Data::Printer. Module has become unmaintained and is failing cpants.

md/MultiMember.md, after:

# Multi Member

Multi Member Elections can be a good way of obtaining proportionality or at least minority representation. Instead of electing one representative for a seat, several are chosen.

## Vote for One

Voters each pick one choice and the top choices are chosen to fill the seats. Depending on the number of seats and the distribution of factions this can be very inefficient and force voters to attempt to coordinate their votes. If there are three seats and one faction has more than 2/3 of the support, the large faction needs to offer two choices and make sure their votes are split evenly between the two.

## Approval, Cumulative Approval and X of Y

Approval is a better method and is used in a lot of places. Voters mark as many choices as they please, and the seats are filled by the top vote getters. Approval has problems with Bullet Voting and with factions being able to coordinate their vote, such that the largest coordinated faction can take all of the seats. Cumulative Approval gives the voter a fixed number of votes that they can distribute among choices.

X of Y is an improvement of Approval that restricts the number of choices parties can offer and the number of choices a voter can select. Vote for up to X choices, but Y choices will be elected. This method can be used to guarantee minority seats in a body, but will not efficiently allocate those seats. X of Y is tabulated in the same manner as Approval.

## Single Transferable Vote (STV)

Most of the discussion on Multi Member methods focuses on this group.

### Generalized Description of STV

STV uses a Ranked Ballot.

A quota based on the number of valid ballots is set, usually __1 + ( Ballots ÷ ( Number of Choices + 1 ) )__.

The highest choice (plurality) that exceeds the quota is elected. The amount by which the choice exceeded the quota is the Surplus, this is redistributed to the next highest choice on the ballot. This is where the methods diverge, some older methods randomly picks ballots to redistribute, but all modern methods split the ballots.

If no choice reaches the quota, a choice is eliminated and their ballots are redistributed.

The Vote::Count STV template also elects all remaining choices in the event that eliminating a choice would make it impossible to fill all of the seats.

## Vote Charging

Surplus Transfer methods can generally be explained in an alternate fashion as charging the ballots (as if they were a roll of small coins) for each choice they help elect. Restating STV in this fashion may make it easier to explain.

## Scoring

With Approval, Ranked or Range Ballots each possible outcome of the election can be used to generate scores based on the voter preferences, the outcome generating the highest score is chosen.

Scoring encounters the same weighting issues as Borda Count does.

## Multi Member Methods Implementation and Status

| Method | Implementation |
|:------------- |:-----|
| Vote For One | [Vote::Count::TopCount](https://metacpan.org/pod/Vote::Count::TopCount) |
| Approval | [Vote::Count::Approval](https://metacpan.org/pod/Vote::Count::Approval) |
| X of Y | [Vote::Count::Approval](https://metacpan.org/pod/Vote::Count::Approval) |
| Cumulative Approval | *Unimplemented* |
| STV methods with Random | won't implement random in Vote::Count |
| STV: ERS97 | unimplemented |
| STV: Scottish | unimplemented |
| STV: Meek | unimplemented |
| Scoring | unimplemented |
